Accurate: A measurement is considered accurate if it is judged to be close to the true value.

Acid: when dissolved in water, its solution has a pH value less than 7. Acids are proton (H+ ion) donors.

Activation energy: The minimum energy needed for a reaction to take place

Alkali metal: Elements in Group 1 of the periodic table.

Alkali: Its solution has a pH value more than 7.

Alkane: Saturated hydrocarbon with the
general formula C,H,,,.,.for example,
methane, ethane, and propane.

Alkene: Unsaturated hydrocarbon which
contains a carbon-carbon double
bond, Its general formula is C,H,,, for
example, ethene, C,H,

Alloy: A mixture of two or more elements,
at least one of which is a metal.

Anhydrous: Describes a substance that
does not contain water.

Anode: The positive electrode in
electrolysis.

Anomalies Results: that do not match
the pattern seen in the other data
collected or are well outside the range
of other repeat readings (outliers).

Aqueous solution: The mixture
made by adding a soluble substance
to water.

Atmosphere: The relatively thin layer of
gases that surround planet Earth.

Atom: The smallest part of an element
that can still be recognised as that
element.

Atom economy: A measure of the
amount of starting materials that end
up as useful products.

Atomic number: The number of
protons (which equals the number of
electrons) in an atom. It is sometimes
called the proton number.

Avagadro constant: The number of
atoms, molecules, or ions in a mole of
any substance (i.e, 6.02 x 10” per mol).

Balanced symbol equation: A symbol
equation in which there are equal
numbers of each type of atom on
either side of the equation.

Base: The oxide, hydroxide, or carbonate
of a metal that will react with an acid,
forming a salt as one of the products.
(If a base dissolves in water it is called
an alkali), Bases are proton (H+ ion)
acceptors.

Biodegradable: Materials that can be
broken down by microorganisms.
Biofuel Fuel made from animal or plant products.

Blast furnace: The huge reaction vessels
used in industry to extract iron from
its ore.

Bond energy: The energy required to
break a specific chemical bond.

Burette: A long glass tube with a tap
at one end and markings to show
volumes of liquid; used to add
precisely known volumes of liquids to
a solution in a conical flask below it.

Bronze: Alloy with copper and tin.

Carbon footprint: The total amount of
carbon dioxide and other greenhouse
gases emitted over the full life cycle of
a product, service or event.

Carbon steel: Alloy of iron containing
controlled, small amounts of carbon.

Categoric variable: Variables that have values that are labels. For
example types of material.

Catalyst: A substance that speeds up
a chemical reaction by providing a
different pathway for the reaction that
has a lower activation energy. The
catalyst is chemically unchanged at
the end of the reaction.

Catalytic converter: Fitted to exhausts
of vehicles to reduce pollutants
released.

Cathode: The negative electrode in
electrolysis.

Ceramics: Materials made by heating
clay, or other compounds, to high
temperatures (called firing) to make hard, but often brittle, materials, which make excellent electrical insulators.

Chromatography: The process whereby
small amounts of dissolved substances
are separated by running a solvent
along a material such as absorbent
paper.

Climate change: The change in global
weather patterns that could be caused
by excess levels of greenhouse gases
in the atmosphere.

Closed system: A system in which no
matter enters or leaves.

Collision theory: An explanation of
chemical reactions in terms of reacting
particles colliding with sufficient
energy for a reaction to take place.

Composite: Materials made of two or
more different materials, containing
a matrix or binder surrounding and
binding together fibres or fragments
of another material which acts as the
reinforcement.

Compound: A substance made when
two or more elements are chemically
bonded together.

Continuous variable: Can have values
(called a quantity) that can be given
by measurement (for example, mass,
volume, temperature, etc.).

Continuous data: Data that can take any
value.

Control group: If an experiment is to
determine the effect of changing
a single variable, a control is often
set up in which the independent
variable is not changed, thus enabling
a comparison to be made. If the
investigation is of the survey type a
control group is usually established to
serve the same purpose.

Control variable: A variable which
may, in addition to the independent
variable, affect the outcome of the
investigation and therefore has to be
kept constant or at least monitored

Covalent bond: The bond between two
atoms that share one or more pairs of
electrons.

Covalent bonding: The attraction
between two atoms that share one or
more pairs of electrons.

Cracking: The reaction used in the
oil industry to break down large
hydrocarbons into smaller, more
useful ones.

Data: Information, either qualitative or
quantitative, that has been collected.

Delocalised electron: Bonding electron
that is no longer associated with any
‘one particular atom.

Dependent variable: The variable for
which the value is measured for each
and every change in the independent
variable.

Diffusion: The automatic mixing of
liquids and gases as a result of the
random motion of their particles.

Directly proportional: A relationship
that, when drawn on a line graph,
shows a positive linear relationship
that crosses through the origin.

Discrete data: Data that can only take
certain values.

Displacement reaction: A reaction in
which a more reactive element takes
the place of a less reactive element in
‘one of its compounds or in solution.

Distillation: Separation of a liquid from
a mixture by evaporation followed by
condensation.

Dot and cross diagram: A drawing to
show only the arrangement of the outer
shell electrons of the atoms or ions in a
substance.

DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid): A large
organic molecule that encodes genetic
instructions for the development and
functioning of living organisms and
viruses.

Double bond: A covalent bond
made by the sharing of two pairs of
electrons.

Electrical (chemical) cells: Contain
chemicals that react to produce
electricity.

Electrolysis: The breakdown of a substance
containing ions by electricity.

Electrolyte: A liquid, containing free-
moving ions, which is broken down by
electricity in the process of electrolysis.

Electron: A tiny particle with a negative
charge. Orbit the nucleus of
atoms or ions in shells.

Electronic structure: A set of numbers
to show the arrangement of electrons
in their shells (or energy levels).

Element: A substance made up of only
‘one type of atom. An element cannot
be broken down chemically into any
simpler substance.

End point: The point in a titration where
the reaction is complete and titration
should stop.

Endothermic: A reaction that takes in
energy from the surroundings,

Equilibrium: The point in a reversible
reaction at which the forward and
backward rates of reaction are the
same. Therefore, the amounts of
substances present in the reacting
mixture remain constant.

Exothermic: A reaction that transfers
energy to the surroundings.

Fair test: A fair test is one in which only the
independent variable has been allowed
to affect the dependent variable.

Fermentation: The reaction in which the
enzymes in yeast turn glucose into
ethanol and carbon dioxide.

Filtration: The technique used to
separate substances that are insoluble
in a particular solvent from those that
are soluble.

Flame emission spectroscopy: A
method of instrumental analysis in
which the light given off when a
sample is placed in a flame produces
characteristic line spectra to identify
and measure the concentration of
metal ions in the sample.

Flammable: Easily ignited and capable of
burning rapidly.

Formulation: a mixture that has been
designed as a useful product.

Fraction: Hydrocarbons with similar
boiling points separated from
crude oil

Fractional distillation: A way to
separate liquids from a mixture of
liquids by boiling off the substances
at different temperatures, then
condensing and collecting the
liquids.

Fuel cells: Sources of electricity that are
supplied by an external source of fuel.

Fullerene: Form of the element carbon
that can exist as large cage-like
structures, based on hexagonal rings of
carbon atoms.

Functional group: An atom or group of
atoms that give organic compounds
their characteristic reactions.

Galvanized: Iron or steel objects that
have been protected from rusting
by a thin layer of zinc metal at their
surface.

Giant covalent structure: A huge 3D
network of covalently bonded atoms.

Giant lattice: A huge 3D network of
atoms or ions.

Giant structure: See Giant lattice.

Gradient: A measure of the slope of a
straight line on a graph.

Group: All the elements in the columns
(labelled 1 to 7 and 0) in the periodic
table.

Half equation: An equation that
describes reduction (gain of electrons)
or oxidation (loss of electrons).

Halogens: The elements found in
Group 7 of the periodic table.

Hazard: A hazard is something (eg. an
object, a property of a substance or an
activity) that can cause harm.

Homologous series: A group of related
organic compounds that have the
same functional group.

Hydrated: Describes a substance that
contains water in its crystals.

Hydrocarbon: A compound containing
only hydrogen and carbon.

Hypothesis: A proposal intended to
explain certain facts or observations.

Incomplete combustion: When a
fuel burns in insufficient oxygen,
producing carbon monoxide as a toxic
product.

Independent variable: The variable for
which values are changed or selected
by the investigator.

Inert: Unreactive.

Intermolecular force: The attraction
between the individual molecules in a
covalently bonded substance.

Ion: A charged particle produced by the
loss or gain of electrons.

Ionic bond: The electrostatic force of
attraction between positively and
negatively charged ions.

Ionic equation: An equation that shows
only those ions or atoms that change
in a chemical reaction.

Isotope: Atoms that have the same
number of protons but different
number of neutrons, i.e. they have the
same atomic number but different
mass numbers.

Law of the conservation of energy: The
total mass of the products formed in
a reaction is equal to the total mass of
the reactants.

Le Chatelier’s Principle: When a change
in conditions is introduced to a
system at equilibrium, the position of
equilibrium shifts so as to cancel out
the change.

Life cycle assessment: Carried out to
assess the environmental impact of
products, processes or services at
different stages in their life cycle.

Line graph: Used when both variables
are continuous, The line should
normally be a line of best fit, and may
be straight or a smooth curve.

Line of best fit: A straight line that
represents the general trend of data. An
equal number of data points should be
above and below the line of best fit.

Mass number: The number of protons
plus neutrons in the nucleus of
an atom.

Mean: The arithmetical average of a
series of numbers.

Mixture: When some elements or
compounds are mixed together and
intermingle but do not react together
(ie. no new substance is made).
A mixture is not a pure substance.

Mole: The amount of substance in the
relative atomic or formula mass of a
substance in grams.

Molecular formula: The chemical formula
that shows the actual numbers of atoms
in a particular molecule.

Monomers: Small reactive molecules
that react together in repeating
sequences to forma very large
molecule (a polymer).

Nanoscience: The study of very tiny
particles or structures between 1 and
100 nanometres in size — where
I nanometre = 10° metres.

Neutral: A solution with a pH value of
7 which is neither acidic nor alkaline.
Alternatively, something that carries
no overall electrical charge.

Neutralisation: The chemical reaction
of an acid with a base in which a salt
and water are formed. If the base is
a carbonate or hydrogen carbonate,
carbon dioxide is also produced in the
reaction.

Neutron: A dense particle found in the
nucleus of an atom. It is electrically
neutral, carrying no charge.

Noble gas: The very unreactive gases
found in Group 0 of the periodic table.
Their atoms have very stable electronic
structures.

Non-renewable: Something which
cannot be replaced once it is used up.

Nucleus: The very small
and dense central part of an atom that
contains protons and neutrons.

Order of magnitude: A comparison
of the size of values. Two values are
the same order of magnitude if their
difference in size is small in comparison
to other values being compared.

Ore: rock which contains enough
metal to make it economically
worthwhile to extract the metal.

Oxidation: The reaction when oxygen
is added to a substance / or when
electrons are lost.

Oxidised: Describes a substance that has
had oxygen added to it / or has lost
electrons.

Particulate: Small solid particle given
off from motor vehicles as a result of
incomplete combustion of its fuel.

Percentage yield: The actual mass
of product collected in a reaction
divided by the maximum mass that
could have been formed in theory,
multiplied by 100.

Periodic table: An arrangement of
elements in the order of their atomic
numbers, forming groups and
periods.

pH number: which shows how strongly
acidic or alkaline a solution is.

Pipette: A glass tube used to measure
accurate volumes of liquids.

Polymer: A substance made from very
large molecules made up of many
repeating units.

Precipitate: An insoluble solid formed by
a reaction taking place in solution.

Precise: A precise measurement is one in
which there is very little spread about
the mean value. Precision depends
only on the extent of random errors. 
it gives no indication of how close
results are to the true (accurate) value.

Prediction: A forecast or statement about
the way something will happen in the
future.

Pure: unadulterated, in its natural state